So what we're going
to do now is we're
going to contrast Java streams
with other technologies.
And we'll compare
and contrast streams
with several other
things that you probably
are familiar with if
you've been programming
for any length of
time, or you've
been a computer user
for any length of time.
So a Java stream, as we
talked about before--
just to reiterate this--
is a sequence of data
elements or data items
that are conceptually produced
one at a time from some data
source.
And an operation can read these
items from an input stream one
by one and also then
do some transformation
and write them to
an output stream.
And the output stream
of one operation
can be input into the
input stream of another.
So that's the whole
concept of a pipeline.
Well, what is this?
This should look
very familiar to you.
This is basically
an implementation
of the pipes and
filters pattern that
originally appeared in the
Pattern-oriented Software
Architecture, vol.
1 book.
So if you were to go
look at that book,
or if you were to go look at the
link here, which is an updated
version of the pipes
and filters pattern
description that you
can get from the web,
the intent of the pipes
and filters pattern
is to divide an app's tasks into
multiple self-contained data
processing steps, and then
connect these steps together
by intermediate
data buffers to form
a data-processing pipeline.
Well, gosh, that sounds
exactly like what a stream is.
And there's no coincidence.
That's actually the intent.
Now, it turns out
that there's actually
a whole bunch of other
implementations of the pipes
and filters pattern that
you're probably familiar with.
One that's outside the
scope of computer software
is water purification systems.
So if you ever have
a water filter,
you know that you basically
have a water source which
is probably coming
into your house
from the municipal
water supply system--
the water company, as it were.
And then it runs through
a bunch of cylinders
that contain filters
that try to filter out
various kinds of
impurities in the water.
And so you can see
a picture here.
You can read about water
filters here at the link below.
Very common,
especially if you're
in an environment where the
water you get from the city
is not the best water.
Or it might come from a well
for that matter, I suppose.
Some other examples that
you may be familiar with
are pipelines in
the UNIX or even
the Windows command-line
shells, like bash or seashell
or the Bourne shell
or the tcsh shell
or whatever shell
you like to use.
So this is a very
common approach,
where you can take the output
of one program called a utility,
typically, and then pipe it into
the input of another program
or utility.
The simple example
I show here starts
by producing a list of all the
files in the usr bin directory.
And then we have a
little regular expression
we run through the sed utility
to strip out the directory
part.
So now we just end up
with a list of file names.
Then we're going to go ahead and
select any names in that stream
that start with z.
We will then take all the
names that start with z.
We will sort those items.
And then we will print
them out as a single line
by removing the new line.
And so if you were
to do this, you
would get an output something
along the lines of what
I show at the bottom, here--
at least on my machine,
which is a Linux machine.
This is obviously a stream,
much like Java streams.
It's obviously an implementation
of the pipes and filters
pattern.
The main difference
between a Java stream
and filters in a
UNIX pipeline is
that a filter
typically processes
most or all of the
content it receives,
whereas a Java stream
can short-circuit things.
I guess to be
fair, I should also
mention that there are various
options and flags you can have
and utilities in UNIX
that will only process
a handful of the elements.
For example, you can use
things like head or tail,
where you can restrict
the amount of processing.
We'll see this as we get a
little further into streams.
There are things called
short-circuiting operations,
where you can only process a
certain amount of the elements
in the stream before you stop.
Yet another example of a
stream of the pipes and filters
pattern is the System
V STREAMS framework.
And System V STREAMS is a
very interesting framework
that's been available for
decades in UNIX platforms.
System V STREAMS was
originally developed
by Dennis Ritchie and his
colleagues at Bell Labs.
You're probably familiar
with Dennis Ritchie
because, of course, he is one of
the original inventors of both
the UNIX operating system and
the C programming language.
And along the way,
he also came up
with this really cool
concept called STREAMS.
He actually called it STREAMS.
And it was basically a
plugable protocol framework
for being able to
compose layered protocol
stacks in the UNIX System
V operating system kernel.
And just like with streams
that we have in Java streams,
you could have these
different layers
or basically what we would
call in Java streams aggregate
operations.
Dennis Ritchie
called them modules.
And these things could
be connected together.
And then data could
flow, messages
could flow, from the top
at the user-process level,
through the different conversion
operations in the stream,
all the way to the bottom,
which would typically
be some kind of device driver.
And of course, it also
worked the other way.
So when data came
in on the network,
it was handled by
the device driver.
And then that
would have the data
processed through the
different protocols
up the protocol stack,
coming from the bottom,
and then being deposited
eventually into a user process
at the top of the stack.
And of course, this works really
nicely for layered protocols,
such as the internet protocol
stack, where you've got TCP.
You've got IP.
You typically have
some data link protocol
like ethernet and so on.
And each of these
different layers
can be represented as connected
modules in a System V STREAM.
So System V STREAMS
are yet another example
of a pipes and filters pattern.
What was interesting about
the System V STREAMS framework
is that it was developed
in C. And it was developed
probably 30 years ago or so.
I think one of the papers
that Dennis Ritchie wrote
was from the 1980s timeframe--
maybe even before that point.
And yet this
particular framework
written in C for the
operating system kernel
is absolutely chock-full
of design patterns.
And those patterns have
persisted long enough
to be relevant in the
context of Java streams.
So what's really cool about
understanding the world
through a patterns
perspective is
you can start to
really appreciate
the commonality of
different technologies
that exist in different
epochs, different languages,
different operating
environments,
and yet see how they all
implement very similar design
concepts and design structures.
So I hope that ties back to
some of the earlier discussions
that we've had in other courses
about the value of software
patterns--
to be able to see
the commonality
and be able to know
these recurring solutions
apply to solve problems that
exist at many different layers
and in many different contexts.
Then the last thing
I want to talk
about in this context of other
implementations of the pipes
and filters pattern is
something that's actually
come in later versions of Java.
So with the Java 9
release, which occurred,
I think, probably
2018 or something
like that, they added something
called reactive streams.
And reactive streams are a
very interesting combination
of features which also implement
the pipes and filters pattern.
So Java reactive
streams essentially
are a set of interfaces
that are intended
to provide the
interoperable foundation
for so-called reactive
programming frameworks.
So examples of reactive
programming frameworks
you're probably familiar
with at this point
would be things like the
RxJava framework, which
is available on a number
of different platforms.
Actually, the Rx
extensions are available
in multiple languages,
for that matter.
I think there's a
C sharp version.
There's a Java version.
This runs in mainstream Java on
the mainstream Java platform.
It runs in Android.
There's also implementations of
reactive programming in the ACA
framework.
And basically what
reactive streams does
is it combines two patterns.
It combines the
iterator pattern, which
allows subscribers to
say here's how much data
I want to receive.
And then it also combines
the observer pattern,
which allows subscribers
to be notified when
data is emitted by a publisher.
And so you can basically
think of this as the POSA 1,
or Pattern-Oriented
Software Architecture, vol.
1, publisher-subscriber pattern.
And what you can do between
the publisher and subscriber
is you can go ahead and
interpose various operations--
intermediate
operations, as we would
refer to them in Java streams.
The main difference
between reactive
streams, which came
in Java 9 and beyond,
and the Java streams
framework we've been talking
about from earlier versions--
from the Java 8 epoch--
is that the Java streams
model is a lazy model where
the terminal operation pulls
the data from the data source
through the various processing
elements in the stream.
Conversely, with Java
reactive streams,
it's a push-based model
where the publisher
goes ahead and pushes out the
events, or emits the events.
And they're pushed out
through the processing filters
or the intermediate
operations, as it were,
to the ultimate subscriber.
So you can kind of
think of these things
as almost two sides of the same
coin, where regular streams is
more of a pull-based model,
whereas reactive streams
is more of a push-based model.
We will go into
a bit more detail
a little bit later when we talk
about the CompletableFutures
framework because one of the
things that I'll emphasize
at that point is that
completable futures are
another example of what's
known as reactive programming.
Not surprisingly, the Reactive
Streams model in Java 9
is a classic example of
reactive programming.
It's really the essence of it.
And as we'll see later,
reactive programming
is a very popular
programming paradigm that's
based on four principles.
It's based on the concept of
being responsive, resilient,
elastic, and
essentially asynchronous
or asynchronous messaging.
And these principles
are also what's
embodied in the Java
CompletableFutures
framework-- which,
interestingly enough, isn't
the most obvious realization of
the pipes and filters pattern.
But when you look and see
how you can compose together
so-called dependent actions
with the Java CompletableFutures
framework, you'll
see how that also
contains elements of the
pipes and filters pattern.
So hopefully this discussion
of these different variants
of implementations
of pipes and filters
has helped you understand how
what you find with Java streams
is really just a
recent incarnation
of a set of concepts
that have been around
for decades and decades.
The UNIX pipeline model
came out in the early '70s,
so it's been
practically 50 years
that this has been around.
System V STREAMS has now been
around for 30 or 40 years.
Reactive streams
is fairly recent.
But the point is that these
concepts are not things that
just fell off the turnip truck.
They've been around
for a very long time.
And so it helps to
be able to think
about the software in terms
of these eternal patterns.